---
author: whoo
date: "2024-03-27T15:45"
featured: false
image: ./images/angler.png
title: The Mechanics of Worldbuilding in Sousou no Frieren
tags: ["blog"]
---

There’s an aspect of worldbuilding that I always think about, and that is the concept of scope. I actually don’t know if there are more proper terms for what I want to talk about here, but I think it’s an underrated component of worldbuilding and one that is key to making a developed setting for a story to occupy. This concept of "scope" comprises two parts; the first is the setting's relevance to the story and the extent to which it is explored as the story unravels. The second is the significance of the characters’ actions (and the plot they serve) on the setting they inhabit. In short, scope is a balance between how the world affects the plot and characters, and how the plot and characters affect the world.

<br />

In this write-up I will focus on the scope of worldbuilding, though it’s a subject that would inevitably overlap with other forms of scope like narrative scope or emotional scope. But what makes understanding scope important in the context of worldbuilding? How does it contribute to creating a believable setting? Firstly, it defines the volume of the world, so the author can fill it up accordingly, like an empty clear cube you can decorate however you like as long as no space is left unused. It’s all about setting expectations for both the author and the audience. Defining the scope puts into perspective how much room an author is giving themself to play with. And for the audience, they are given expectations for how far this world will potentially reach. A major part of creating a living, breathing world is figuring out what is going to occur in that world and then figuring out the relative significance of each event within these predefined boundaries. 

<br />

I’ve said so many times already that I consider Sousou no Frieren to be one of the most impressive anime I’ve ever watched. I love how it knows exactly what it intends to say and pulls it off with equal parts precision, emotional depth, and unspoken swag. The command of its setting’s wide breadth and scope that it has is the backbone of such a strong narrative. While the physical scope of the story's setting is an entire continent, there’s no wasted space wherever the story takes the cast. The plot is a meandering journey where much of the cast’s encounters are found in serendipitous detours, many of which return in surprising yet natural ways later down the line. They pass through small and unremarkable villages and swaths of forests and mountain passes, with their arrival in relatively larger cities often marking major story events. Not much in terms of appearances actually distinguish the villages or cities from each other. Instead, it’s the inclusion of local customs, history, and the people that bring out the life of these places for the short period of time Frieren and her companions are there for. It’s the attention given to the little corners of the world that make these scattered afterthoughts on a map actually matter. A central theme of showing kindness in even the smallest of occasions is consistently demonstrated during Frieren’s travels both past and present. It’s made a point to show the actual greater significance that these supposedly useless sidequests have on individuals and the generations that come after. It stretches across the entire show, from unnamed villagers to characters you wouldn’t expect to show such a side to their personalities. The plot’s adventure format coupled with the idea of transience as another major theme elevates these forgotten conversations and overlapping experiences. Though most of the places the cast pass through are insignificant themselves, they accumulate to gradually build up a world that is convincingly lived in and alive. 

<br />

The big epic quest to defeat the Demon King plot is already over and done with, and now Frieren finds herself on another journey to Ende, but for a much more personal reason than the first time. There’s no grand purpose with world-saving implications. Frieren wants to talk to Himmel one more time; Fern simply wishes to accompany her; Stark wants to return to his master with stories of his adventures; Sein wants to bag a milf wants to find his childhood friend. Frieren and her companions may be some of the most powerful people on the continent, but many of them are reserved about the fact, betraying their comparatively niche and diminutive ambitions to that of the hero’s party. Though this modesty shouldn’t be mistaken for dullness since the way the anime conducts itself is so effortlessly cool and badass. Action scenes are elegant and precise and trimmed of all the fat in their brevity. Moments of grandeur are like a mic drop, walking away while an awe-inspired silence is left in its wake. By presenting these characters and what they do in such a down to earth way, they retain their individuality and pronounced importance whilst seamlessly fitting in with everyone else and everything in their world at the same time. 

<br />

In contrast, the journey of the hero’s party was quite literally all about saving the world from the demons. However, whenever Frieren relates what she encounters in the present to her time in the hero’s party, she doesn’t ever really reminisce on moments that would normally be recorded in history books or exaggerated in fairy tales. What has stayed with her for the eighty years since her first journey are the times in between the main quest - those tender moments of respite or quiet reflection. She remembers helping people they meet as quickly as they leave and talking to her friends, then taking in their words which would become lessons that would unwittingly challenge her reclusive nature. Predicting when these flashbacks will happen during an episode is almost comically easy, but god damn, do they add so much bittersweet characterization to everyone involved. It’s undeniable that the eradication of the demon king and his army was the most significant achievement of the generation, or even the millenia, and yet, the hero’s party’s lasting impact is something much more profound. In just eighty years, the hero’s party is regarded as something of a mythical historical event, despite two of its members currently living. Throughout the continent there are monuments tucked away in town squares and festivals honoring the hero’s party, but like all legends, their nuance will eventually be forgotten, too. What may eventually become of the work of the hero’s party is suggested by the presence of Monk Kraft and his partner, who together once saved the world in some now unknown fashion in some long-gone era. Any proof of their existence is found only in the stone faces of forgotten statues, Kraft himself, and the goddess he believes in. But the fact that we’re living on a floating rock aside, Himmel and his companions still ushered in the current era of peace. Himmel once said he refuses to ignore someone in need right front of him, no matter how small the matter is. Himmel wasn’t the hero for just slaying the Demon King; his unwavering compassion is directly responsible for the kindness passed down from generation to generation. It is the reason why Heiter took in Fern, Eisen mentored Stark, and why Frieren now makes the genuine effort to understand the people around her. It is in this way how the peaceful state of the world affects its plot and characters.

<br />

The outcome of all this is a sprawling world with a profound sense of substance and depth. The story promises a world to explore and does so at a near perfect pace, where my only complaint is wishing Frieren’s party could have stuck around a little longer. The worldbuilding efforts have earned the right to now leave it to the audience’s curiosity to fill in the blanks in the lore with the wealth of information that’s already been carefully built up. The work of the hero’s party gave the world an era of peace that will far outlast them individually and maybe even Frieren herself. Being the legendary hero, the most powerful warrior, the most powerful mage, or even leaving a mark in history, isn’t what most impacts the world. Instead, it’s the seemingly insignificant and small acts of kindness born from those aspirations and then reciprocated, which truly matter and shape the world. I think the way the anime is able to communicate such a deeply sentimental and emotionally fulfilling story is how it has woven a genuine lesson in kindness into each of its meticulously written characters and world they live in. In the end, Sousou no Frieren’s grand scope is lovingly realized and is nothing short of a triumph. 








